---
title: Paint it Plone! (Simone Deponti)
slug: paint-it-plone-simone-deponti
date: 2012-10-11 09:00
tags: [plone, ploneconf]
---

Simone is a developer but is still talking about design to bridge the
gap between both 'worlds'.

Theming is not only about adding decorations. It's also about altering
structure and modifying user experience.


# Start of a project

A good approach is with wireframes, mockups with specs and modular
design. This way you only focus on the important parts first. Unfortunately
sometimes you start with printed stuff (the design), no specs and no
patterns in the design (where e.g. two pages look completely
different). Try to prevent this.

Since web sites are not print, you should work with proportions
instead of absolute measures. Use the font size as the base. Then make
paddings and margins relative to the font size. Finally decide on the
size of the other elements.

If you don't start with a mobile experience, you are doing graceful
degradation instead of progressive enhancement. The latter is harder
do design, but should improve performance. But apparently mobile
browsers download everything even if the CSS will not be applied
(because the media query does not match).

Do not focus on decorations. Instead focus on a black and white
version and add colours and graphical elements later. Otherwise you
are adding lipstick to a pig.


# Typography

By starting out with he black and white version, it also immediately
becomes clear that typography is very important. But it is also
complex. It encompasses both single characters and the text as a
whole. Besides fonts, *space* is also essential: line heights, spacing
between paragraphs, spacing between words (e.g. caused by justified
text). Please give your design space.

A tip regarding web fonts: when you use them, please make sure you do
it right. Do not include a different name for a variant of a font
(e.g. `MyFont` and `MyFontBold` for example), but give them the same
name and change the `font-weight` or `font-style`.


# Grids

A grid is a creative constraint and provides a exoskeleton to the
page. It is a tool that helps in placing stuff. Simone warns us to
avoid fluid grid. Because they take up a certain proportion of the
screen, they will not work on small screens for example. You could for
instance use the Deco grid system.

You can also make your own grid. If you use a good starting point
(e.g. the Golden Grid System) it is not that hard. For responsive
design, you will have a different number of columns based on the
screen size.


# CSS

CSS preprocessors are a handy tool. Simone gave an example using
Less. For simple examples, the benefit might not be clear. But if you
use variables for colours and need to change a colour, the benefit is
obvious: you only need to change it in one place (instead of doing a
global search and replace). Whenever you use CSS3 and need vendor
prefixes, preprocessors can handle them automatically for you if you
want to so you don't have to be bothered with it.

Simone presents statistics for IE usage and gives us a list of
bugs/missing features for IE 6--9. Tricks: use
[`modernizr.js`](http://modernizr.com/) to include browser specific
optimisations and throw away borders for old IE since they cause a lot of
problems due to a broken box model.

# Reuse what's there

In Plone there are too many page types to generate a design for each
of them. It's easier to decompose a page into blocks and widgets which
can be
reused. [Twitter bootstrap](http://twitter.github.com/bootstrap/) is
more than a set of CSS. It's a documented set of widgets. But you can
also generate something similar yourself.

Try to reuse the classes already available in Plone. For instance, do
not create your own class to hide content. There's markup for tables,
tabs, portlets, etc. There's also Javascript available you can reuse,
such as jQuery.

With Diazo you can for instance wrap existing elements with custom
tags (e.g. a `<div>` with a class or id). XSL also provides
if...then...else constructions you might want to use. You can also
override classes if needed (because you didn't reuse the Plone
classes). Diazo might be overkill. You might also use
[z3c.jbot](http://pypi.python.org/pypi/z3c.jbot) to override
templates.


# Conclusion

Theming is a complicated thing. But if you communicate you can get
feedback and accomplish teamwork. This will lead to a better
result. If you are working on a team, do not settle for less than
"good." If something looks bad, the customer will also complain about
it so it's better to do a good job straight away.

[View the slides](http://www.slideshare.net/simonedeponti/paint-it-plone)
or [watch the video](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=S-ZuCgS6k00).
